==beginning==

You have been appointed Commander-in-Chief of RAF Bomber Command.  The Air Ministry have instructed you to employ your forces on attacks upon enemy shipping and upon purely military targets; your crews are under standing orders not to bomb if there is any danger to civilians, and in particular not to drop their bombs without visual identification of the target.

The Air Ministry further reminds you that due to the shortage of industrial capacity, and the lack of trained aircrews, losses must be conserved as much as possible.  Nonetheless you are expected to strike against the enemy with as much force as these restrictions allow.

You are also notified that the Political Warfare department wishes you to drop their propaganda leaflets over Germany whenever you can spare the forces to do so, in order to sow dissent and discontent amongst the German people.

==CIV==

In light of the costs of waging the bomber campaign, and of the enemy's clear indication that he intends to observe no limits to the conduct of war (as demonstrated by recent events), the restrictions upon bombing in civilian areas have been lifted; bombs may be dropped without positive target identification.  However, you are still directed to aim your attacks upon military targets; the War Office does not believe this country should engage in the indiscriminate bombing of civilians.

==ABD==

As experience has shown that precision bombing requires much greater accuracy than appears to be attainable, you are now directed to pursue the area bombing of cities.  Your attacks should now be focused upon the morale of the enemy civil population, and in particular industrial workers.  You are accordingly authorised to employ your forces without restriction.

==Blenheim==

The twin-engined Bristol Blenheim (Bristol Type 142M) was, when introduced in 1937, as fast as contemporary fighters.  By the outbreak of war, however, it had already been outclassed by the rapid pace of aeronautical development.  This, combined with its poor defensive armament, leave it vulnerable to fighter attack.  As a light bomber, it carries a mere 1,200lb of bombs, and hasn't the range to attack distant targets.  It's best employed against coastal targets and enemy-held airfields and troop concentrations in France.

==Whitley==

The Armstrong Whitworth A.W.38 Whitley is a twin-engined medium bomber, designed for night operations.  Due to the high angle of incidence of the wings (to ensure good takeoff performance), the Whitley flies with a nose-down attitude; the resulting high drag makes it rather slow.  However, it can carry a bomb load of about 7,000lb, the heaviest of the bombers available to you at the start of the war.  It's best used on shortish-range night attacks and leaflet raids.

==Hampden==

The Handley Page HP.52 Hampden was conceived as a fast, manoeuvrable, "fighting bomber".  It's a twin-engined medium bomber, and the fastest of the bombers available in 1939.  Its bomb load of 4,000lb is lighter than the other medium bombers, and it's fairly vulnerable to modern fighters.  Consequently, it may struggle to reach well-defended targets.  It's a good bombing platform, though, so accuracy is good.

==Wellington==

The Vickers Wellington, popularly dubbed the "Wimpy", is anything but; its geodesic construction allows it to withstand terrible damage and continue with the operation.  It's the most survivable, and also the most reliable, of the twin-engined medium bombers at the start of the war.  It carries a load of 4,500lb, and is a solid all-rounder.

==Manchester==

The Avro 679 Manchester is the first of the heavy bombers to come into service.  It's powered by two Vulture engines, which are sadly unreliable and underpowered; as a result, it's likely to suffer losses both from enemy action and from mechanical failure.  However, it does carry a decent bomb load of 10,350lb.  It should probably be treated as a Whitley replacement.

==Stirling==

The Short S.29 Stirling is the first four-engined heavy bomber available.  It's fairly slow with a low ceiling, but good manoeuvrability gives it a decent chance of survival.  It carries a heavy 14,000lb load, but isn't great for accuracy.  It also has poor reliability and serviceability.  Nonetheless, it's a welcome addition to the heavy striking force.

==Halifax I==

The Handley Page H.P.57 Halifax I is a four-engined heavy.  Its load of 13,000lb is slightly less than the Stirling, and it suffers from a fatal yaw spiral in violent evasive manoeuvres, but it's faster, more reliable, and much more serviceable.  It's also a better bombing platform.  It gives you a realistic long-range heavy capability.

==Lancaster I==

The Avro 683 Lancaster is the classic heavy bomber.  Developed from the Manchester, but re-engined with four Merlins, it carries 14,000lb of bombs, is reliable and survivable, and makes a good bombing platform.  It's a great all-round heavy, capable of anything from area bombing cities at night to precision strikes on special targets by day.

==Mosquito==

The de Havilland DH.98 Mosquito is a high-performance, multi-rôle aircraft.  It's made chiefly of wood, making it easy to produce; it's extremely fast, reliable, and almost impossible to shoot down.  Although it only carries 4,000lb of bombs, it's capable of applying them with considerable accuracy.  It's best used as an OBOE-equipped Pathfinder, marking targets with pyrotechnics for the heavies to aim at.  It can also make 'nuisance raids' deep into enemy territory, keeping the Germans awake and nervous on nights without a major raid, and it's handy for diversionary attacks too.  A remarkable aircraft.

==Halifax III==

The H.P.61 Halifax III is an improved Halifax; the yaw spiral has been fixed with a revised tailplane, and the bombload increased to 13,500lb.  Though eclipsed by the more famous Lancaster, the "Halibag" is a solid workhorse; for one thing, it's cheaper.  It's also easier to maintain, due to its rugged construction.  It can prove handy for secondary tasks, such as diversionary raids, and it's not a bad bomber... it's just not the best.

==Lancaster X==

The designation "Lancaster B.X" actually refers only to airframes built in Canada by Victory Aircraft Ltd., but in Harris it represents all the developed variants of the Lanc.  With more powerful engines and better armament (the four .303 Brownings in the tail are replaced with twin .50s), the upgraded Lanc is faster, carries more (16,000lb of bombs), is more reliable and survivable - it's simply the ultimate heavy bomber.
